Protocol
--------

Clients of coutune communicate with server through TCP connections.
A given running coutune server listens on some (configurable) port; 
clients connect to that port, send commands to the server, read 
responses, and eventually close the connection.

There is no need to send any command to end the session. A client may
just close the connection at any moment it no longer needs it. Note,
however, that clients are encouraged to cache their connections rather
than reopen them every time they need to store or retrieve data.  This
is because coutune is especially designed to work very efficiently
with a very large number (many hundreds, more than a thousand if
necessary) of open connections. Caching connections will eliminate the
overhead associated with establishing a TCP connection (the overhead
of preparing for a new connection on the server side is insignificant
compared to this).

There are two kinds of data sent in the coutune protocol: text lines
and unstructured data.  Text lines are used for commands from clients
and responses from servers. Unstructured data is sent when a client
wants to store or retrieve data. The server will transmit back
unstructured data in exactly the same way it received it, as a byte
stream. The server doesn't care about byte order issues in
unstructured data and isn't aware of them. There are no limitations on
characters that may appear in unstructured data; however, the reader
of such data (either a client or a server) will always know, from a
preceding text line, the exact length of the data block being
transmitted.

Text lines are always terminated by \r\n. Unstructured data is _also_
terminated by \r\n, even though \r, \n or any other 8-bit characters
may also appear inside the data. Therefore, when a client retrieves
data from a server, it must use the length of the data block (which it
will be provided with) to determine where the data block ends, and not
the fact that \r\n follows the end of the data block, even though it
does.

Keys
----

Data stored by coutune is identified with the help of a key. A key
is a text string which should uniquely identify the data for clients
that are interested in storing and retrieving it.  Currently the
length limit of a key is set at 250 characters (of course, normally
clients wouldn't need to use such long keys); the key must not include
control characters or whitespace.

Commands
--------

There are three types of commands. 

Storage commands (there are two: "set", "put") ask the server to store
 some data identified by a key. The client sends a command line, and 
 then a data block; after that the client expects one line of response, 
 which will indicate success or faulure.

Retrieval commands (only one: "get") ask the server to retrieve data 
corresponding to the key. The client sends a command line, after that 
for this given key the server finds it sends to the client one response 
line with information about the item, the server finished with the "END" 
response line.

All other commands don't involve unstructured data. In all of them,
the client sends one command line, and expects (depending on the
command) either one line of response, or several lines of response
ending with "END" on the last line.

A command line always starts with the name of the command, followed by
parameters (if any) delimited by whitespace. Command names are
lower-case and are case-sensitive.

Expiration times
----------------

Some commands involve a client sending some kind of expiration time
(relative to an item or to an operation requested by the client) to
the server. In all such cases, the actual value sent may either be
Unix time (number of seconds since January 1, 1970, as a 32-bit
value), or a number of seconds starting from current time. In the
latter case, this number of seconds may not exceed 60*60*24*30 (number
of seconds in 30 days); if the number sent by a client is larger than
that, the server will consider it to be real Unix time value rather
than an offset from current time.


Error strings
-------------

Each command sent by a client may be answered with an error string
from the server. These error strings come in three types:

- "ERROR\r\n" 

  means the client sent a nonexistent command name.

- "CLIENT_ERROR <error>\r\n"

  means some sort of client error in the input line, i.e. the input
  doesn't conform to the protocol in some way. <error> is a
  human-readable error string.

- "SERVER_ERROR <error>\r\n"

  means some sort of server error prevents the server from carrying
  out the command. <error> is a human-readable error string. In cases
  of severe server errors, which make it impossible to continue
  serving the client (this shouldn't normally happen), the server will
  close the connection after sending the error line. This is the only
  case in which the server closes a connection to a client.


In the descriptions of individual commands below, these error lines
are not again specifically mentioned, but clients must allow for their
possibility.


Storage commands
----------------

First, the client sends a command line which looks like this:

<command name> <key> <flags> <exptime> <bytes> [noreply]\r\n

- <command name> is "set", "put"

  "set" means "store this data".  

  "put" means "store this data, but only if the server *doesn't* already
  hold data for this key".

- <key> is the key under which the client asks to store the data

- <flags> is an arbitrary 32-bit unsigned integer (written out in
  decimal) that the server stores along with the data and sends back
  when the item is retrieved. Clients may use this as a bit field to
  store data-specific information; this field is opaque to the server.

- <exptime> is expiration time. If it's 0, the item never expires
  (although it may be deleted from the cache to make place for other
  items). If it's non-zero (either Unix time or offset in seconds from
  current time), it is guaranteed that clients will not be able to
  retrieve this item after the expiration time arrives (measured by
  server time).  

- <bytes> is the number of bytes in the data block to follow, *not*
  including the delimiting \r\n. <bytes> may be zero (in which case
  it's followed by an empty data block).

- "noreply" optional parameter instructs the server to not send the
  reply.  NOTE: if the request line is malformed, the server can't
  parse "noreply" option reliably.  In this case it may send the error
  to the client, and not reading it on the client side will break
  things.  Client should construct only valid requests.

After this line, the client sends the data block:

<data block>\r\n

- <data block> is a chunk of arbitrary 8-bit data of length <bytes>
  from the previous line.

After sending the command line and the data blockm the client awaits
the reply, which may be:

- "STORED\r\n", to indicate success.

- "NOT_STORED\r\n" to indicate the data was not stored, but not
because of an error. This normally means that either that the
condition for "put" command wasn't met, or that the item is in a 
delete queue (see the "del" command below).



Retrieval command:
------------------

The retrieval commands "get" and "gets" operates like this:

get <key>*\r\n


- <key>* means one or more key strings separated by whitespace.

After this command, the client expects zero or more items, each of
which is received as a text line followed by a data block. After all
the items have been transmitted, the server sends the string

"END\r\n"

to indicate the end of response.

Each item sent by the server looks like this:

VALUE <key> <flags> <bytes> \r\n
<data block>\r\n

- <key> is the key for the item being sent

- <flags> is the flags value set by the storage command

- <bytes> is the length of the data block to follow, *not* including
  its delimiting \r\n

- <data block> is the data for this item.

If some of the keys appearing in a retrieval request are not sent back
by the server in the item list this means that the server does not
hold items with such keys (because they were never stored, or stored
but deleted to make space for more items, or expired, or explicitly
deleted by a client).


Deletion
--------

The command "delete" allows for explicit deletion of items:

del <key> [<time>] [noreply]\r\n

- <key> is the key of the item the client wishes the server to delete

- <time> is the amount of time in seconds (or Unix time until which)
  the client wishes the server to refuse "add" and "replace" commands
  with this key. For this amount of item, the item is put into a
  delete queue, which means that it won't possible to retrieve it by
  the "get" command, but "add" and "replace" command with this key
  will also fail (the "set" command will succeed, however). After the
  time passes, the item is finally deleted from server memory.

  The parameter <time> is optional, and, if absent, defaults to 0
  (which means that the item will be deleted immediately and further
  storage commands with this key will succeed).

- "noreply" optional parameter instructs the server to not send the
  reply.  See the note in Storage commands regarding malformed
  requests.

The response line to this command can be one of:

- "DELETED\r\n" to indicate success

- "NOT_FOUND\r\n" to indicate that the item with this key was not
  found.
